The Ministry of Interior was established during the period of Slovak autonomy (October 6, 1938 - March 14, 1939). In addition its extensive competence, which it took over from the Country Office (such as issues of the Presidium of the Country Office, organizing of national security - the Police and Gendarmerie, organizing of Defense education etc.) it also gained competences of the former Ministry of Public Health and Physical Education as well as the Ministry of Social Care. Thus the Ministry of Interior’s competence and scope were always very wide.
At the end of 1939 the following structure of the Ministry of Interior has stabilized: Section I - Presidential, Section II - Police - legal issues, Section III. - Municipalities, Section IV. - Social, Section V. - Health, Section VI. - Management of Institutes Accounting department and economic governance.
Thus competences of the Ministry of Interior was very wide and it reached from the public administration management, through the organization of police and security matters as well as social matters and healthcare.
During the following years of Ministry’s existence there were several changes made within its structure which resulted in the creation of different departments. As far as the persecution of Jews in Slovakia is concerned, creation of the special department (14) within the Section I – Presidential was of great importance.
Department 14 was entrusted with extensive powers in with the organization and implementation of anti-Jewish policy in Slovakia. The wide scope included all administrative, legal and economic matters related to the establishment and function of labor camps for Jews, registration of Jews (Census of Jews), deportations of Jews from Slovakia, and later also extended to work permits of Jews. This department was first led by Gejza Konka and later by Anton Vašek.

The fonds contains documents of the Ministry of Interior of the Slovak Republic from years 1939 and 1945, including some of the most important documents relating to the Holocaust in the Slovak territory. This includes various types of registers of Jews created by the state bodies in 1939-1945. Among others there are Sheets of the Census of Jews from 1942 , 1943, 1944 covering most of Slovak districts of those days. In addition, the fonds contains documents on different anti-Jewish persecution measures of state administrative bodies and security (police) forces. Fond also contains transport lists of Jews deported from Slovakia in 1942 and documents pertaining the preparation and organization of transports on the level of civil administration as well as the security foces. This includes the lists of so call „concentration transports“ to the concentration centers within Slovakia as well as transport lists of specific transports of Jews sent from Slovakia from 25 March 1942 till 20 October 1942. These are one of the most important documents pertaining the persecution of Jews living at the territory of Slovakia 1939-1945 as well as extensive documentation on establishment and existence of labor camp for Jews.
Fonds also contains the card files of Jews deported from Slovakia in 1942 (so called „Transport cards“) as well as the card files of Jews living in Slovakia in 1942-1943.

